Everybody laughed, and Uncle Andy did not try to avoid taking in all of
Valerie with his eyes. She wore light blue slacks, beach sandals and a
white shirt, the tails of which were tied in a knot under her breasts,
making it an appropriate midriff outfit. Her voluminous blond hair
floated cleanly in the salty breeze and her face and neck were already
deeply tanned. She looked up at him and caught his eyes and their
smiles faded--slowly.

Words between them would have been superfluous. Inevitably, their
companionship in this lost world had developed into a much closer
relationship.

The four of them sat there on the rock, bare legs dangling over,
and ate K-rations. In the reassuring warmth and sunlight before the
comprehensible aspect of the ageless sea, they felt little need for
conversation. They were content with the awareness of _not_ being alone.

Henry watched a printed wrapping from the K-rations float on the waves
below, and he thought it far more incongruous than the picnic basket.
K-rations--a million years removed from their source. Along these
shores were empty tin cans and bottles and old newspapers and magazines
lying among the seaweeds and flotsam.

_Man_ had come to Paradise....

       *       *       *       *       *

After lunch they fell into the usual discussion. Where were they? How
had they come here? What was the alien's purpose of taking the two
babies? Was the alien here, in this world, or in some other one? What
would be the possibilities of exploring this world and what might they
discover--if anything? Were they doomed to stay here forever?

Uncle Andy expressed the opinion that, until something better
developed, it would be the sanest course to get their little colony
organized under a recognizable form of government. Dwellings had to be
built. Sources of food had to be secured. Exploration parties must be
sent out.

"In substance," he said, "that's what the big meeting tonight is all
about. We have to get organized and come to decisions regarding the
future."

"Look!" said Henry. "There's Tommy Weston and some of his gang." He
pointed back toward the jungle.

All four of them looked shoreward and discerned six bare-chested men
standing there about a hundred feet from them, just under the shade of
the flowering trees. Four of them were construction men, led by the big
man who had sat with Scarface in the seat behind Henry, Uncle Andy and
Dr. Edwards back when--things were normal. This two hundred and forty
pound package of trouble was Tommy Weston, heavy chested, big fisted,
tattooed, square jawed, bewhiskered, and with a brooding tawny-eyed
stare. His crinkly hair, on his head, chest and brawny arms, was a
dark, rusty red. And he was heavily freckled.

He stood there talking to his men and gesticulating toward the group
on the rock. Henry recognized two of the men as the only two cooks
belonging to the camp. One was an ugly hulk of a man who in his youth
might have been more than a match for Weston. He was a garrulous,
argumentative Pole, pale-faced, perspiring, and wearing a battered,
black felt hat. The other was young, probably only twenty, but
squarely built and already notoriously hot-tempered, having been in
three fistfights since the crash landing. His hair and lashes were pure
white. Hence the obvious name, Whitey.

"They're coming up here," said Valerie. "I wish they wouldn't. It was
so peaceful."

"Relax, honey," Uncle Andy replied. "Maybe they only want to borrow my
fishing gear."

"Man, de only thing dat big boy wants to borrow 'round here is
trouble!" put in Pee Bee. "Ah wish ah was back home playin' pool on
Central Avenue now!"

Henry merely watched the men climb the rock. He saw their ugly grins
as they looked at Valerie, and he thought of the separation of the
sand and pebbles in the jar again. Uncle Andy got to his feet and held
up the devil lizard for them to see. It was a disarming neighborly
gesture, but Henry felt it was somehow pathetic. He had a distinct
feeling of being cornered. He knew Uncle Andy felt that, too, but he
didn't show it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Camp was almost a mile distant and completely out of sight behind two
jungle covered headlands. The six men came up onto the rock and stood
there grinning at them.

"It probably isn't even edible," said Uncle Andy, still referring to
the devil lizard. "But this sea is teeming with life."

Tommy Weston looked down at Henry and saw his box of worms. "You ain't
doin' so hot, then," he answered. "Lemme try that pole. Gimme some of
them worms, Henry."

Both Uncle Andy and Henry complied, while Valerie kept very much to
herself. She still sat on the edge of the rock, with her back toward
them, and looked down into the swirling water. Pee Bee was a powder
blue study in self-effacement. He kept his eyes on the water as though
he wished he were a fish.

Weston hooked on his bait and cast far out. "We been makin' the
rounds," he said. "We're checkin' up on everybody's ideas about the
meeting tonight."

"Well, now, that's a pretty sure sign we're all going to survive,"
remarked Uncle Andy, but not as naively as he sounded. "I didn't know
anyone was actively concerned about it. I'm glad you fellows think the
meeting is that important."

"Sure it's important!" exclaimed the big, Polish cook with the felt
hat. "Vot you t'ink ve goink around for a valk only for our healt'?"

"Shut up, Sceranka!" said Weston, reeling in the line. "You see, we
don't like the set-up. There's too many government boys who think
naturally they got the say-so around here. They still recognize Captain
Merman as the head man. And it seems they sort of got things set up
their own way." The other five men, if they were not watching Valerie,
were watching Uncle Andy for his reactions as Weston spoke.

The fishline came in empty. Weston baited again.

"I can see your point," said Uncle Andy. "You favor a more democratic
method of setting up the colony, now that the emergency is over and we
are peacefully established on land. The rules governing international
flights do not apply here. Since there is no government, or any contact
with one, the people must elect one. Is that what you're getting at?"

Weston looked at him in surprise. "Yeah! That's the idea!" he
exclaimed. "The democratic system!"

But Uncle Andy and Henry did not like the grins on the other men's
faces.

"Now take me, for instance!" Weston continued, casting out his line
again. "I'm up for election!"

This time, Valerie had to turn and stare at him in astonishment. He
looked down at her as he reeled in the line and gave her a smile that
revealed gold-capped teeth.

"What's the matter, beautiful? Wouldn't I make a good candidate? I got
a platform already. No red tape. No promises. And no taxes. Just do as
I say and we'll all get along."

"Obviously," said Uncle Andy, "that's a brand of politics that belongs
to gangsters. What can you possibly hope to gain even if you are the
Boss of this outfit?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The hook came in empty, so Weston threw the pole down on the rock.
He faced Uncle Andy and gave him that twany-eyed, brooding look of
his. "I got this to gain," he said. "None of us knows what's gonna
happen. Maybe our chances of gettin' back to civilization are slim.
But if things get tough I ain't going to be breakin' my back under
nobody else's whip. I don't go for this gold braid and paper baloney.
I think half the camp is made up of a helpless mess of blubber as far
as _men_ go. Of course, as far as the women go we don't mind them bein'
helpless! We'll take care of them, but first they gotta come down off
their pedestals and get some sense into 'em!" He and all his men looked
at Valerie. "We might never get back home," he said, pointedly, "and in
that case things have got to be a lot different around here. And me and
my boys have just got the guts to make the necessary changes!"

Uncle Andy stiffened, but he held his temper. "Tommy," he said, "what
is it you want? How does this visit of yours apply to the meeting
tonight?"

"We're going to force the issue on voting in a new leader. I'll be a
candidate. If you know what's good for you, you'll vote for _me_!"

Uncle Andy wanted to ask him why they should vote at all as long as
Weston had decided how the voting was going to go, but instead he said,
"How about giving us time to consider it? Until tonight."

"Sure! Just so you decide by tonight. You can't vote before then!"

"Yeah but what about the dame?" Whitey blurted out. "You know what you
said."

Instinctively, Valerie sprang to her feet and drew close to Uncle Andy.
Just as instinctively, he put an arm around her, protectively.

Tommy Weston hooked his thumbs into his pants and drew close to Uncle
Andy. "Now there's another point I'd like to bring up," he said. "Just
who elected you the fair haired boy with blondie, here? You may have to
get used to some different ideas before long."

"So it might as well be now!" put in Whitey, coming shoulder to
shoulder with Weston.

The other four men closed in also. The big Pole with the hat was
sweating more profusely now, and his eyes grew large as he stared at
Valerie.

"So we've come to this," said Uncle Andy, actually stalling for time.

"Let's face it!" exclaimed Weston. "We always _been_ here!"

"Yes," Henry broke in. "You're right! There was a thin, fake covering
called civilization, once. But now at the end of time the covering
comes off and we find nothing has changed since the Stone Age!"

Tommy Weston sneered. "So the young genius has to put his two-bits in,
too! Well, boys, the conference is over!" He reached out for Valerie's
shirt, just as Pee Bee suddenly got to his feet in a crouching
position, ready to uncoil.

Uncle Andy's fists were coming up when another man shouldered his way
between the construction men. Action froze on all sides as they looked
at the newcomer. He stood there in shirt, trousers and tan sport shoes.
It was Scarface, wearing a very handy looking shoulder holster. From
the holster, the butt of a black automatic protruded.

"Any trouble up here?" he queried, nonchalantly, as though he were
asking if the fish were biting.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tommy Weston's already tanned face darkened, as did Whitey's. The other
men backed away, slightly. In addition to having a respect for the gun,
they respected the man. None of them knew who Scarface was, actually,
but they remembered he had had the nerve to shoot it out with the alien.

"So the little gun boy is going to take sides!" sneered Weston.

Scarface raised his brows and spoke unsmilingly through his teeth.
"I've got news for you," he said. "As a trouble maker you're an
amateur. I'm professional, but please don't ask for a demonstration
today. Now I want all you hairy-chested little girls to climb back on
your kiddy cars and toddle home, because there's no more Mickey Mouse
today."

"If you didn't have that goddam gun I'd swedge your sassy yap shut!"
threatened Weston, looming over him and fuming.

Scarface's eyes flashed. "I said get the hell out of here!"

Weston brought himself under control and tried another tack. "What's in
this for you, Scarface?" he asked. "You don't strike me as the Sunday
School type. You know what the score is around here. So why don't you
put in with us or sit out?"

"Your business and what you do is none of _my_ business," said
Scarface, "as long as you leave my friends alone. These are my friends,
so lay off!"

"Look out!" screamed Valerie, and Uncle Andy jerked Scarface out of the
way just in time to avoid Whitey's lunge.

Whitey lunged again, for the gun, and as Scarface turned toward him,
Weston threw an arm around his neck that looked like the root of an
oak tree. Scarface kicked out at Whitey, making him lose his balance,
and Pee Bee bowed his back as Whitey went over him. When Pee Bee
straightened up, two things happened. His head collided solidly with
the big Pole's chin, knocking him out, and Whitey sailed beautifully
into the crashing waves below. His terrified yell was drowned by
foaming seawater. Simultaneously, Uncle Andy snatched the gun from
Scarface just as the latter broke loose by scraping his heels down
Weston's shins, almost breaking his arches, and at the same time nearly
pulling the other's ears off.

Weston broke free of the ear grip while Uncle Andy held the other
men at bay. As Scarface turned on Weston, the latter swung at him
ponderously. Scarface ducked and gave him a swift jab into the stomach.
As Weston doubled, he received a two-fisted uppercut, and as he toppled
he was aided on his way by a double blow across the left temple. He
came down like a brick chimney and lay there in a heap.

Pee Bee stood there rubbing his head and looking down at the prostrate
figure of the Polish cook.

"Get Whitey!" cried one of the construction men, pointing at the ocean.
"He'll drown!"

While Uncle Andy still held them at bay, they all looked at the man in
the water. Whitey was screaming and flailing wildly about, while the
undertow and the incoming waves alternately dragged him outward and
dashed him against the rocks.

"What's the matter?" asked Scarface, rubbing his knuckles. "Can't he
swim?"

"He can swim," said the same man, "but something's got him!"

As they watched, the water darkened around Whitey.

"It's blood!" cried Valerie. "Oh my God, the poor man!"

"Look!" cried Henry. "Those are devil lizards! Hundreds of them!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Like a voracious swarm of piranhas, the scarlet little monsters
converged on Whitey and tore him apart. As the blood filled the
water, other "things" were attracted. There were glimpses of finned,
serpentine backs and vast, amorphous shadows beneath the churning
waves. To those who watched, the eternal light above them seemed
deceptive. Subjectively, they were aware of the dark Unknown. The very
dark _Unknown_.

_Where were they?_

One of the construction men ran away screaming. Pee Bee, carrying the
lunch basket, took Henry's arm and also started to lead the way, gently
but firmly. Uncle Andy handed the gun back to Scarface. He led Valerie
down the rock, wordlessly. And Scarface stood there looking back at the
bloodied water for a full minute.

Then he followed the others. Weston and Sceranka, he decided, would
have to come by themselves and find their own way back to camp.

The fishing pole lay there, abandoned....

The camp was similar, in effect to a military beachhead prior to
organization. There was one tent, salvaged from the survival gear
that the plane carried. This was used by the women for the purpose of
changing their clothes, as well as a sort of "safety deposit vault"
for valuable articles such as the ship's log, medicinal supplies
and various instruments--plus short wave sending and receiving gear,
now quite useless owing to a lack of power source and an absence of
activity on the wave bands.

Beyond the tent lay confusion. Small huts constructed of branches and
giant leaves, or square areas enclosed by sheets or towels, suspended
on crude frameworks rigged together with poles. Here and there a more
presentable structure of branches indicated the work of construction
men. Between these were scattered both small and large heaps of luggage
and personal belongings--suitcases, pullmans, hatboxes, overnight bags,
small trunks, packing cases--even an aluminum cage in which reposed
a bewildered Pekingese dog. A very lonely dog. The only dog in the
universe.

Inevitably, there were clotheslines displaying underwear, shirts,
socks, silk stockings, bras--and a man's pair of black silk monogrammed
pajamas. These latter belonged to the Englishman, Sir Cyril Rollins.
And there was a hammock strung between two straight-boled trees without
leaves which bore a weird fruit that looked like pomegranates. The
hammock was shared by the three soldiers from Texas. Just now the
hammock was empty except for a ukelele and a million year old copy of
Life Magazine.

Farther up the endless beach was the plane, lying crumpled on its
belly, with wings drooping dejectedly into the sand and water. One of
the landing gears had burst up through a nacelle. The great, swift,
mechanical bird of another age was a useless thing--and a painful
reminder of what once was their own familiar world.

Altogether there were in camp sixty males and twenty-four females,
representing three races and eight nationalities. A cross section of
the human race. Seemingly, all there was left of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Henry returned with the others to camp, Martia was the first to
greet him. She had suddenly lost the last vestige of her patrician
affectations, because she ran to him abruptly. Or rather, their
thoughts seemed to meet between them even before they drew together. He
squeezed her hand warmly as she drew him to one side, excitedly.

"Mother is lost!" she exclaimed. Her eyes were slightly reddened from
crying.

"Lost! How do you know?"

"She and Sir Rollins and that Mr. Langham and the Crispin sisters and
those two mothers who lost their babies went exploring for spring
water. They've been gone all day and nobody can find them! Henry, I'm
so worried! Can you speak to your Uncle and ask him to organize a real
search party. There's no night here. We can start right away!"

"But the meeting--"

"Please!" she insisted.

"What I mean is, no search party can be organized during the big
meeting, and that's about ready to get under way--after everybody eats
supper." They could see the fires along the beach where men and women
were cooking. Either they were cooking small game caught in traps or
certain species of edible crustacea, or a potato-like fruit that was
abundant in this region. The food from the plane was long gone. "Why
doesn't your governess do something about it? What does she think?"

"Emily? She made a few soldier boys go with her to search--those three
Texas boys--and I think three of those WAACs went along. But they've
disappeared, too!"

"All right," said Henry. "Let's go see Uncle Andy."

They found him, with Valerie Roagland and the air hostess, Peggy
Hollenbeck, engaged in a group discussion that included Captain Merman,
several high-ranking U.S. Army officers and the five congressmen led
by Burley. Also, there were a few businessmen and scientists present,
including Dr. Edwards. Most of them stood around a charcoal fire
boiling small chunks of meat on long wires and drinking "Beachcomber's
Tea," made from the leaves of a giant vine that someone had discovered.
A chemist and a doctor had collaborated on its analysis and found it to
be healthful.

"We still represent the United States," Congressman Burley was saying,
"and Colonel Rogers here says that the servicemen are on our side.
Also, we can count on the English to be with us, if necessary, and the
three Norwegians. I don't think Weston has a chance of making trouble.
Now here is a list compiled today showing the number of men--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Congressman Burley stopped talking and followed the gaze of all the
others. He saw Henry and Martia standing by the fireside, holding hands
and looking very impatient.

"All right!" he said. "You kids will have to clear out. We're having a
conference."

"That," said Henry, "is somewhat obvious. But I--"

"Now look here! Don't you get sassy!" Burley glared at Henry
impatiently, but Uncle Andy walked over to the boy and put an arm
around his shoulders. He placed his other arm around Martia.

"Just a minute!" he interrupted. "I'm afraid you don't know Henry. He
would never have intruded if he did not have something important to
say."

"Always pampering the kid," commented Dr. Edwards to Captain Merman.
"Thinks he's a genius and he's only a pest!"

"Your English allies have gotten themselves lost," said Henry. "Lady
Dewitt, Sir Rollins, the Crispin sisters, Langham, Emily Duncan,
several other women and three servicemen."

"Please!" Martia cried. "It's always daylight here. Can't a search
party be sent right away?"

Some of the men looked at Captain Merman. He was a tall, lean man in
his late thirties, still wearing the pants and shirts of his uniform,
as well as the cap. His paleness and the redness of his eyelids,
thought Henry, were probably due to a hyperthyroid condition.

"My orders," said Merman, "were that no explorations would be conducted
without proper authorization. They went on their own, principally
because of Lady Dewitt's refusal to use the river water and because our
distilled water can't be rationed in her favor. I don't see why--"

"You are engaged here in an emergency conference," said Henry, "to
determine what can be done about Tommy Weston's gang. If you're
worried, why don't you stall for time by organizing the whole camp into
a search party--including Weston's men? The physical action and the
adventure of it will be tantamount to a psychological weapon against
anarchy."

Martia beamed at Henry in pride and gratitude, but most of the men
guffawed.

"Ye gods!" exclaimed one of the other congressmen. "That sounded like
it was going to be a filibuster! Talk about lobbying! This kid is
Capitol material!"

"But it isn't getting us anywhere," said Burley.

"Just a minute," said a small, dark-complexioned man wearing a black
shirt, white slacks and dark glasses. "I've heard, second-handedly,
some interesting ideas from this boy." Henry had learned that this was
Dr. Jules Bauml, a noted astro-physicist attached to the Mount Palomar
Observatory. "He thinks we have been transported through time and that
it is futile to try contacting our own civilization unless we avail
ourselves of a time machine. Of course that is a pessimistic view, but
owing to observations of my own I should like to hear his reasons for
arriving at such a conclusion."

"Oh hell!" ejaculated one of the businessmen present. "We're probably
down in the Caribbean somewhere!"

"No, by God!" said another one. "That wouldn't explain the permanent
daylight and no sun!"

"A freak of Nature," insisted the first one. "You've heard of the Land
of the Midnight Sun. What's so different about this?"

"Everything!" said Henry.

They all looked at him, startled, including Uncle Andy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry addressed Dr. Bauml. "As an astronomer you will understand the
nature and importance of the ionosphere," he said, amidst raised
eyebrows all around. "It is that layer of the atmosphere which protects
us from the dangerous short radiations from the sun. These quanta,
striking atoms of oxygen, create ionized oxygen and ozone, forming
the ionosphere. Such atoms are necessarily in such rapid motion that
they would be lost in space were it not for the magnitude of Earth's
gravitation. That is why Earth bears--or _bore_--a high form of
intelligent life whereas Mars must continue to lose its ionized oxygen
into space and could therefore not support a high form of life."

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed Bauml, impressed. "But what has that to do with
the present?"

"Venus does not have an ionosphere," continued Henry. "Otherwise it
would have shown up in spectrographs. Its atmosphere is caused largely
by violent volcanic action. Volcanoes, incredibly heated storms and no
ionosphere, spells no oxygen and no life. Therefore, conclusion number
one: We are still on Earth."

Several congressmen snorted. "Who said we weren't?"

"Go on!" encouraged Bauml, while Dr. Edwards began to listen in some
surprise. "I agree so far! This is Earth, but where do we go from here?"

"Let us disregard, for the moment," said Henry, "that there is no
night. Just concentrate on the fact that we can't see the sun at
_any_ time, clouds or no clouds. Ergo, the ionosphere has changed its
composition. It would take millions of years to do that, just as it
took billions of years to build it up in the first place. I submit
that the sun has cooled and the ionosphere is much thicker than it
was before, thus acquiring different characteristics of refraction
which reflect light back to Earth. It is almost like a mirror. Just
as it once reflected radio waves back, it now shuts out the shorter
wavelengths, including light, itself. I submit further, that if the sun
were still bright we should notice a difference in relative brightness
between day and night. Inasmuch as there is no difference, I say that
the sun is now grown dim and feeble, and that we have traveled perhaps
a billion years into the future."

"Hey!" cried out another civilian. "I thought there were only five
psychos in camp! One billion years! What the--"

"Yes," put in Dr. Edwards, with an impatient scowl, "this business of
extrapolating is next to nothing, as it leads nowhere. By the boy's own
argument I could give the rebuttal that if a billion years have passed
then Venus may have had time to finally develop an ionosphere and thus
be able to support the higher forms of life. Behold! I submit that we
are on Venus!" This was followed by sympathetic laughter all around.