"The child is a precocious egotist. This is a serious matter! It is
certainly not a time for youngsters to be heard at all--particularly
when they appear to be addicted to the utterly fantastic!
Extra-terrestrial, indeed! My poor, misguided child," he said to
Henry, "you must face reality! This is either some manifestation of a
Communist plot or--what would be worse--a perverted form of American
advertising that has come close to endangering the lives of all of us!
A rank publicity stunt! A hoax! A criminal _adulteration_ of propriety!"

"What's immorality got to do with it?" queried the negro, fearfully.
"Ah don't care if dis kid is a Republican or a vampire. Ah's worried
about dat _In-Between_ dey got upstairs!"

"Henry!" Martia, huddling close in the protective circle of his arm,
was whispering to him. "I think the same as you!" She was trembling.

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time, the Colonel, the Major, the non-coms and the air hostess,
with the help of the commissary steward and the Swedish actress, had
restored some semblance of order--at gunpoint. Over two dozen cowering,
babbling, questioning passengers were lined up along both sides of the
observation lounge. The newsman was still taking flash-photos. The
staircase was deserted, because the Major stood there threatening to
shoot any unauthorized persons attempting to get down to B deck. Henry
wondered how many realized the gun was not loaded.

The now all important P.A. system sputtered, and all faces turned
toward it in nervous anticipation. The co-pilot's voice came slowly and
quietly now, but tensely. "_Everybody remain exactly where you are.
The--stranger--is moving down the aisle._"

Someone in the observation lounge started to cry out in alarm--one of
the women carrying a baby--but the Colonel said, "Quiet!" so vehemently
that she stopped, staring at the staircase with round glassy eyes.

"_Attention on B deck!_" came another voice over the P.A. speaker.
"_This is Captain Merman. I believe Colonel Rogers is among you. If
so or in his absence if there is any other commissioned member of the
Service present, you will immediately move all women and children
out of harm's way and organize the men to take up a position which
will enable you to ambush the intruder! He will not identify himself
and I consider him to be dangerous. By your combined efforts you are
authorized and directed to capture him, dead or alive. This is an
official order. Passengers are reminded that disobeying an order at
this time will be mutinous and subject to arrest and imprisonment.
Stand by!_"

This was followed by general silence. Henry and Martia listened for
sounds of activity from A deck. Had they heard screams or the sound of
mortal conflict above them they could not have been more terrified than
they were by this absence of any noise other than the muffled roar of
the engines outside. It was as though A deck were totally devoid of
human occupants and the ship were being piloted by phantoms.

Colonel Rogers silently motioned to everybody, herding the women and
children over to one side of the lounge, next to the drinking fountain
where Henry and Martia stood. The Major and the non-coms lined up the
men. There were whispered arguments.

"What the hell does he think he's doing?"

"Yeah, there's more guys on A deck! Why don't they pile him?"

Some of the men, by their facial expression and obvious emotional
condition, were considered inadequate for the task before them and were
excused. The scar-faced man, however, quietly followed instructions.
Henry wanted to go to him and ask him about Uncle Andy, but he could no
longer move against the press of the crowd.

"_He has stopped now at the head of the staircase_," Captain Merman
announced in a low tone. "_He is looking down into the lounge._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Men and women pressed closely against the two adolescents. Henry could
sense their accumulated tenseness. He could hear grown men panting
and he could observe the dryness of their tightly compressed lips,
the animal-like flaring of nostrils, the hunted look in their staring
eyes. He saw one woman grip her husband's hand until he winced. Martia
pressed her face against his shoulder and would not look at the
staircase.

They waited. And Henry watched the Major.

He was a short, stockily built man with a clear, youthful face and
brown, wavy hair. On his chest were campaign ribbons and one small
medal of some kind. Henry saw his Adam's apple move as he swallowed
nervously. His blue-grey eyes never wavered from the staircase.

The scar-faced man stood slightly apart from the crowd, watching the
stairs with a quiet, expressionless intentness. About a dozen men
waited tensely on either side of the stairs, trying to remain out of a
direct line of sight from above.

"_He's coming down!_" said Captain Merman.

There was an audible drawing of breaths as they saw the alien intruder
descend the stairs. He came down to the second step from the bottom and
stood there surveying the scene before him.

He was taller than men, by about a head. His shoulders, arms and
musculature were not human. He was almost four feet across his sloping
shoulders, with ponderous arms and six-fingered hands that reached
below his thick knees. There was a thumb, in addition to the taloned
fingers, a prehensile, calloused extension of the heel of the hand. A
second set of three, prehensile appendages writhed slowly about just
above his multi-jointed wrists. His large, almost circular chest was
split by a multiple lipped orifice that slowly opened and closed like
a sea anemone as he breathed. He wore only a meager harness and loin
cloth, the plastic-like straps supporting a heavy instrument box at
his waist and a pack of apparatus on his back. His skin was leathery,
almost brittle appearing, as though he were partially exoskeletal,
and of mottled colors ranging from dark red to purple, like a mass of
birth-marks that left no room for normal pigment. His face was small,
chinless and devoid of nose or nostrils, but he had a round mouth the
lips of which were like the beak of a blow-fish. His cranium was large,
hairless, and heavily veined. Under absurdly accentuated, hairless
brows, a single, monstrous insect's eye with a thousand gleaming facets
rotated about, examining them balefully.

Martia could not see the alien. Henry could. She felt him shudder.

Three women quietly passed out, but no one paid them any attention.
Colonel Rogers and the Major stood there looking back at the creature
in the same attitude of momentary shock paralysis as the others. The
non-com soldiers and male passengers constituting the ambush on either
side of the staircase were all white-faced, staring. "Scarface" stood
apart, more or less facing the intruder.

Then--the alien spoke. The little beaks of his mouth moved, and a
rather high-pitched voice spoke, laboriously, in a language which was
gutteral, vaguely familiar, but nonetheless incomprehensible.

No one moved, but the men tensed, as though for action.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry recognized the menace of this creature, but he could not
refrain from reflecting, during those brief, weirdly timeless seconds
of inactivity, that to communicate with it might be worth a thousand
Rosetta Stones. A single, intelligible conversation, and Man might
conquer the stars! But this was the Unknown. Man, in his egotism,
abhorred the Unknown as Nature abhorred a vacuum. Man had to reduce the
Unknown to the level of his own understanding. "The only good Injun is
a dead one!" This superman from out of space or time, this harbinger
of wonders yet to be discovered, this mute, alien vessel of perhaps
incalculable knowledge--was suspect, and condemned to be taken, dead or
alive. Henry was aware of no sympathetic sentiments around him. He knew
that the mass reaction was for violence. The judgment: Death!

Suddenly, the newsman took a picture and the flash bulb caused the
alien to start and move one of his amazingly dextrous hands toward the
control box at his waist.

The two babies screamed, and the stranger turned his cyclopean eye upon
them for the first time. He moved down to the floor and started toward
them.

It was then that Scarface whipped out a gun and fired, point blank.
The loud report in that tensely silent place stimulated involuntary
muscular reactions and the crowd seemed to jump as one body.

The bullet made a round, neat hole to the right of the chest orifice,
and the alien stopped. Nobody wondered why Scarface happened to be
carrying a loaded gun. They merely sensed relief when he fired the
shot. A known element had entered the picture. Man had met the Unknown
with a gun, and the gun could do harm. It was effective.

The alien looked at Scarface briefly, then turned dials at his waist,
even as Scarface pumped three more shots into him in very rapid
succession.

Nobody was quite sure of what happened after that. Everyone's vision
blurred. There was a tumultuous ringing in the ears, a giddiness, and a
tendency to black out.

When their vision cleared, the alien had disappeared. And with him the
two babies....

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry, Uncle Andy, Dr. Edwards, Scarface, the G.I. negro and the
Swedish actress were all shoulder to shoulder in the lounge, looking
down at the world.

Martia had been "rescued" by her mother, the Lady Dewitt, and the
governess, whose dough-like face had acquired red emotional splotches
similar to hives.

First aid was being administered to the injured and the
hysterical--including the two mothers whose babies had been stolen.

In spite of the overwhelming enigma below him, where the Atlantic Ocean
should have been, Henry kept remembering Martia--the look she had
given him when she had started back to A deck with her mother and the
governess. Her eyes had revealed a composite expression of sadness,
puzzlement and urgency. With them she had transmitted a message:
_Something unknown binds us together. I will see you again._

More important than that, it seemed to be imperative that he discover
_what_ it was that bound them together. Just the two of them. No one
else in the world.

Why? Why? _Why!_

"Well, Henry," said Uncle Andy, whose pipe had gone out, "after all
that's happened, and in view of the landscape below us, I imagine you
are about ready to extrapolate."

"He's got company!" ejaculated the negro G.I. "Ah's about ready to lose
control, myself! Dat Monster Man done burned up mah nervous system, but
dis here country we's flyin' over is gonna make me exasperate all over
if somebody don't tell me where we is at!"

Dr. Edwards was not concerned with him, just now, Henry noted. Instead,
he studied the unknown country below them--and the peculiar sky--as
though orthodox authority were at a loss for an opinion. The Swedish
actress, known by the name of Valerie Roagland, looked at Henry, her
brilliantly blue eyes searching him curiously.

"When will they tell us?" she asked, with just the pleasant trace of a
liquid accent.

"I don't think the Captain or the Navigator are going to be able to
come up with much," said Uncle Andy, noting with appreciation that
Valerie Roagland's hair was naturally blond and wavy. "Unless they are
equipped with a crystal ball."

"What I'd like to know," said Dr. Edwards, "is _how_ this happened. A
weird creature like that, suddenly appearing on board and stealing two
babies, then disappearing into thin air. And when it's all over--" He
shrugged and pointed below.

Henry looked again at the terrain over which they were flying. The ship
was in descent, and their present altitude of some three thousand feet
gave him a close view.

       *       *       *       *       *

Distant seas, land locked tropical harbors, islands, and the great land
mass below with its rivers and lakes and jungles and very low, pagan
looking hills. Here below them was an apparently uninhabited Eden--a
Paradise that continued endlessly. No ship, sailboat or canoe could
be discerned on any visible body of water. No city, town or village.
No highways, country roads or footpaths. There were only brilliant
flowers, on the ground and in the trees, and a few birds.

Nothing more--except the sky.

The sky was blue, but without a sun, although the brilliance of the day
was equivalent to that of high noon. It was as though a curtain had
been drawn across the heavens--as though they were adventuring within
a shell that encircled the world.

"The absence of the sun," said Henry, "is one basis for conjecture. The
absence of inhabitants is another. But the last announcement they made
over the P.A. system gives us the most conclusive evidence of all."

Dr. Edwards looked at him quickly. "That announcement merely revealed
the fact that no radio contact has been made with anyone," he said.
"What does it prove?"

"It was not announced that the radio is not functioning properly,"
replied Henry. "Given a radio that is in working order, and no
reception; given a primitive looking country such as this one below us,
with no signs of inhabitants, plus a bright blue sky without a sun--and
the answer is obvious."

"I wish it were as obvious to me," said Valerie Roagland. "What do you
make of it, Henry? What _is_ the answer?"

"Man, you's got more complications!" protested the negro G.I. "Come on!
It's a impossibility to scare me any futher, 'cause I got goose pimples
clear out on my fingernails! Let's have it!"

Henry looked expressionlessly through the observation panels and
wondered, as he had wondered all his life, how he knew, _a priori_,
what it took those around him so long to figure out.

"This is another world," he said. "If it is not another planet--"

"Oh, Henry, for the love of God!" exclaimed Dr. Edwards. "You and your
extrapolations! How could this be another planet? What inhabitable
planet would not reveal a sun in its sky? And how could we be
transported there in the twinkling of an eye?"

"The planet, Venus, is surrounded by clouds of some sort," said Henry.
"We have never seen its surface. Perhaps it would be Nature's way to
protect such a world from the brightness and heat of a nearer sun by
surrounding it with some sort of protective layer that only _looks_
like a sky. But I don't think this is Venus."

"Well, that's very nice to know," said Dr. Edwards, sarcastically.

"What _do_ you think it is, Henry?" asked Uncle Andy, puffing again at
his pipe.

"Earth--incalculably removed into the distant future. We have been
hurled into future Time."

Dr. Edwards snorted, straightened up, and left the group without a word.

"Look at the low hills," said Henry to the others. "We've been flying
over this country for several hours. Here we have a small continent,
a comparatively major land mass--but no mountains. That would be
indicative of great geologic age. Furthermore, you will note that the
islands we saw, though tropical, are not the result of coral growth.
They are the tops of low hills. At one time this was a greater land
mass, but it has since been inundated."